<h1>Is Dual Enrollment Worth it? Ranking and Evaluating Every Community College Class I Took So Far</h1>

<div style="margin-top:12px;">Bian Lee • September 12, 2021 • <i>Community college classes to take (or avoid) if you dual-enroll</i></div>

<br/>Dual enrollment is a program that allows high school students to enroll at a local community college and take classes there while simultaneously completing regular high school coursework. Many students are part of this program, in fact, 12.6 percent of public high school students in California have taken one or more community college classes while in high school. (At my school, it seems most people do it). While the classes are not regarded as academically rigorous in comparison to Advanced Placement (AP), it is still a great way to learn certain subjects that you wouldn’t otherwise get a chance in regular high school curriculum, and in some cases you can even transfer few credits to four-year college if you go to a in-state school after graduation. Over the past three semesters (Fall 2020, Spring & Summer 2021), I took 15 classes in three different community college institutions. Some were academic (ex: biology, psychology), while others were practical (ex: Linux), but all in all I took them for my educational development and to explore different areas of study. I was actually planning to take classes this semester as well, but because enrollment priority was given to actual college students, I ended up having to waitlist and not get into the classes I wanted to take. Regardless, in this post I rank and evaluate every community college class I’ve taken, and discuss the pros and cons of dual enrollment.

<br/>Before I start, I should make it clear that I didn’t factor in the quality of professors when I ranked these classes. Every professor I had was pretty amazing; they were all extremely knowledgeable about what they were teaching, and were all very helpful when I did reach out for help. I could probably give every professor a 4 or 5 on ratemyprofessors.com. (I actually did rate one professor that was particularly great). The rankings are solely dependent on the course curriculum and how it was designed, and whether the time I spent learning the materials were valuable or not. On that note, let’s jump right into the ranking (from worst to best).

<br/><b>#15. ENTR 200 - Pathway to Success</b> (Summer 2021, Irvine Valley College)
<br/>This was a single-credit class that I took in which I learned absolutely nothing. It was supposed to be an entrepreneurship class that teaches you to plan for the future financially, and learn habits and mindset that creates successful entrepreneurs. There was an assigned reading on a book <i>Who Owns the Ice House</i> by Clifton Taulbert every week, and students were to complete worksheets along with the reading. While the book had a good message about having a growth mindset and following certain work ethics, everything about it was fairly obvious and there was nothing new to learn. Somehow, for a single unit class, it had quite a number of assignments every week which I found too dull and boring that I always procrastinated on. The assignments were easy and were essentially based on completion (and not accuracy) and I waited until the very last minute to do them, having to submit some late few times and only get half a credit. Worse, because I turned in a few assignments late, I had to do extra credit assignments to make sure I end up with an A, which was even more boring work. (I ended up not actually needing the extra credits, but I guess I did them just to play safe).

<br/><b>#14. CIS 111 - Introduction to Information Systems</b>
(Summer 2021, Fullerton College)
<br/>This was a four unit class, but I did less work than ENTR 200. This is probably because I had already taken CIM 160, CIM 161, CIM 110, CIM 115 by then, and was therefore already familiar with all information technology terms and practices. I don’t even understand why I chose to take this class, I was already pretty bored with learning any more IT.

<br/><b>#13. PSYC 1 - Introduction to Psychology</b> (Summer 2021, Saddleback College)
<br/>I don’t particularly understand why I didn’t enjoy learning introductory psychology, but I simply didn’t. I actually had high expectations so it was a little disappointing to see that I didn’t like it too much. While I placed it pretty low in this ranking, I could see others liking it. It has more to do with personal lack of interest in the subject, rather than dissatisfaction with the course outline.

<br/><b>#12. BUS 186 - Funding Special Projects and New Ventures</b> (Summer 2021, Fullerton College)
<br/>A brief, light work, single unit class. I actually found this class pretty helpful, because I was able to receive feedback on my proposed business model, which happened to be, you guessed it, Open Source Collage. At the beginning of the semester, every student chose a business, non-profit, or other cause that would require funding (raising money). Throughout the semester, we had different mini projects that all related to the idea of pitching a business / non-profit idea to investors for monetary investment. For the final project, we had to give a Pecha Kucha presentation, a fast-paced 20-slide presentation that introduced our idea and why it had potential for growth (thus asking for funding).

<br/><b>#11. CIM 161 - Systems and Network Administrator (Linux)</b> (Fall 2020, Irvine Valley College)
<br/>I took this class to develop my knowledge and skills in Linux, an operating system that’s widely used for server and cloud computing. I personally have been using Ubuntu LTS for my personal desktop computer, so I figured it would be helpful to get basic command and scripting skills to get around within the operating system. The class was project-based, and most of the projects were about configuring different Linux OSes, and how to set it up for different purposes (such as running web servers, databases, compiling source code, etc). Pretty useful class.

<br/><b>#10. CIM 110 - Information and Technology Essentials</b> (Fall 2020, Irvine Valley College)
<br/>This was a fast-paced 4 unit class that taught all essential information technology, from computer components, programming concepts, computing models, and security. I did learn a lot, and it was pretty useful for furthering my general understanding of how computing devices work.

<br/><b>#9. MATH 152 - Calculus II</b> (Spring 2021, Fullerton College)
<br/>I did quite well in the first semester of calculus (Calculus I) so I expected the same for this class. It ended up becoming the first math class that I actually struggled in. It started out fine, but by the time I got to the Series I really had difficulty understanding all the new materials. I had planned to take multivariable calculus the next semester, but I ended up deciding against the idea, given that I had already forgotten so much of the Calculus II material right as I completed the class. But I am ranking the class higher than others, because I guess knowing calculus is <i>INTEGRAL</i> to all STEM fields.

<br/><b>#8. CIM 115 - Databases</b> (Spring 2020, Irvine Valley College)
<br/>As a web developer, I configure and manage databases. This class gave me direct useful knowledge, because I was introduced to different concepts in databases (such as schema, queries) that would actually be implemented in web projects I build (Not so much for Open Source Collage since this platform uses an unorthodox document database, but definitely useful for other projects). I also got the chance to learn basics of SQL database language, which I would have never considered learning myself.

<br/><b>#7. CIM 160 - Computer Network Fundamentals</b> (Fall 2020, Irvine Valley College)
<br/>Although computer networking can be complex and many concepts are obscure, I think it’s pretty fascinating to learn about how different technologies come together to establish the world wide web and internet we have today. I found the class pretty useful to me directly, especially learning about server-client models and how domain name systems work, which are components of web development. I think this class could also be great for business students, since it teaches different network topologies that are suitable for each business model and office space.

<br/><b>#6. BUS 162 - Business Economics</b> (Summer 2021, Fullerton College)
<br/>Definitely one of the most enjoyable classes I took. I like the economy, by the subject itself, and it was even better that it was tied into how different economic views play a role in politics, which is something I’m interested in knowing more about. I don’t exactly understand why it is in the Business Department, however, because the class taught essential concepts in economics and didn’t really apply to business or entrepreneurship.

<br/><b>#5. MATH 151 - Calculus I</b> (Fall 2020, Fullerton College)
<br/>Back when calculus made sense...

<br/><b>#4. BIO 3 - Humans and the Biological World</b> (Summer 2021, Irvine Valley College)
<br/>I took two biology classes over the Summer 2021 semester, both of which I thoroughly enjoyed. After a year of chemistry (probably the only subject I truly hate with passion) at my high school, studying biology was a breeze. Unlike chemistry, everything made sense.

<br/><b>#3. BIO 1 - Life Sciences</b> (Summer 2021, Irvine Valley College)
<br/>BIO 3 and BIO 1 had pretty much the same introductory biology topics, except that BIO 1 left out anatomy and biological processes in the human body. I’m not a big fan of memorizing human body parts, so this class was slightly better than the former.

<br/><b>#2. ARCH 111 - Introduction to Architecture</b> (Summer 2021, Fullerton College)
<br/>A ton of fun. Because it was all project-based (besides lectures on history of architecture and architectural vocabularies), it had the most assignments and required the most time commitment. Yet I actually really enjoyed doing the work. I learned to make 3D models in SketchUp, draw interior layouts of a house, sketch obelisks, and construct a house out of a cereal box. If you know me well, you probably already know how much I like visiting new places and observing cool architectures. From this class I learned about the unique architectural elements of each civilization throughout history, the history behind notable, well-known buildings, as well as construction & design techniques. Besides a few sketches, the class didn’t require much drawing (by hand), which was nice since I don’t have much artistic talent.

<br/><b>#1. ASTR 20 - General Astronomy</b> (Spring 2020, Irvine Valley College)
<br/>The single best class of all. As an introductory astronomy class, it didn’t go in depth into physics and math, and instead everything was concept based. I was quite fascinated by everything I learned, and I’m sure most people in the class felt the same way.

<br/>I would definitely recommend dual enrollment to other high school students. Even if I did dislike certain classes, at least I found out that I don’t like the subject. Completing each class made me feel like I became a slightly more worldly and educated person. The overall experience was really great in helping me discover interests and things I’m passionate about, and also of course at developing better work ethics and learning to become more productive. If you are a high school student unsure of what you want to pursue in the future, the first thing you should do is to learn as many things as you can and explore various different fields. I <i>gained</i> something valuable from each and every class I took (even ENTR 200!), small or big, and that's what makes dual enrollment worth it.
